{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Georgia;}{\f1\fmodern Consolas;}}{\colortbl;\red28\green26\blue22;\red184\green134\blue11;\red43\green106\blue58;\red138\green43\blue43;\red107\green98\blue86;}\viewkind4\uc1\f0\fs23 \pard\sa80\cf1\b\fs44 Prototype Report -- Intent Translation\b0\par \pard\sa40\cf5\fs22\i The Magistrate scene - concept kill-criterion for Adventures\i0\par \pard\sa200\cf5\fs18 Date: 22 June 2026   |   Path: HTML prototype + headless Node harness   |   Classifier: Claude Haiku (claude-haiku-4-5)   |   Status: Playtested\par \pard\sb40\sa160\brdrt\brdrs\brdrb\brdrs\brdrl\brdrs\brdrr\brdrs\brsp80\li120\ri120\fs23 {\cf4\b Verdict: PIVOT.} The core idea is sound, but the first mechanisation of "classify-don't-score" is not stable enough and the decisive-move mapping is wrong. Do not spend on content yet -- apply the two-line fix below and re-test.\par \pard\sb220\sa90\cf2\b\fs28 1. What this prototype is\b0\cf1\par \pard\sa120\fs23 A throwaway build that answers one question from the game concept's production plan: {\b does the classify-don't-score translation pipeline keep a social scene's decisive-move threshold stable run-to-run?} This is the concept's explicit prototype kill-criterion -- the cheapest prove-or-kill of the central technical bet, settled before any design, tooling, or content spend.\par \pard\sa120\fs23 The scene is {\b the Magistrate}: the player stands accused before a corrupt judge and must, in their own freeform words, get acquitted. The intended decisive move is to discover and then invoke the leverage that the magistrate took bribes -- which should collapse a hard persuasion threshold to a trivial one (Pillar 3).\par \pard\sb140\sa50\b\fs24 Falsifiable hypothesis\b0\par \pard\sa120\fs23 If a player expresses the decisive move in their own varied words, the pipeline collapses the threshold consistently. Accept if, across N~20 runs of ~5 natural phrasings, the decisive-move outcome holds >=95%, and the deterministic stages are 100% reproducible given a fixed classification.\par \pard\sa120\fs23 {\b Riskiest assumption (tested first):} that an LLM classifying evaluative/social intent is stable enough run-to-run that the threshold does not flip.\par \pard\sb220\sa90\cf2\b\fs28 2. How it works (and how it maps to the architecture)\b0\cf1\par \pard\sa120\fs23 The prototype mirrors the accepted ADRs closely enough that learnings transfer, while remaining throwaway code that production never imports.\par \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx2400 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx7800 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 \b Prototype component\b0\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 \b What it does\b0\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 \b Mirrors\b0\cell \row \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx2400 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx7800 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 Stage A -- classify\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 Claude Haiku NAMES the axis, channel, a coarse ordinal, and whether the bribe-scandal is invoked, via a strict tool-use schema. It never emits a number.\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 ADR-0004\cell \row \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx2400 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx7800 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 Stage B -- score\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 Deterministic, class-coloured tables turn the classification into an integer capability magnitude.\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 ADR-0004\cell \row \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx2400 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx7800 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 Scene Model\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 Entities, conditional thresholds, the scandal leverage facet, a suspicion meter with a reactive lockdown, authored narration keys (never generated prose).\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 ADR-0003\cell \row \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx2400 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx7800 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 Resolver\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 Pure per-beat engine; evaluates the conditional threshold (facet collapse = the decisive move) and fires an authored outcome.\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 ADR-0006\cell \row \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx2400 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx7800 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 Class colouring\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 The same words resolve differently for Diplomat / Assassin / Scholar.\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 Pillar 5\cell \row \pard\par \pard\sa120\fs23 {\f1\fs20 Deliverables: prototype.html (playable, single file, no install) and harness.mjs (headless twin for terminal/CI; live classifier when a key is present, else a deterministic stub).}\par \pard\sb220\sa90\cf2\b\fs28 3. How it was run\b0\cf1\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa60\fs23 \bullet\tab {\b Deterministic half} -- run headlessly with no key: a 1000-run determinism self-test, class-divergence check, and the discover-then-leverage mechanic.\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa60\fs23 \bullet\tab {\b The real bet} -- run against live Claude Haiku ({\f1\fs20 claude-haiku-4-5}), strict tool use: a probe printing the raw classification 5x per phrasing, plus the stability harness (N=20, Diplomat, scandal already discovered).\par \pard\sb220\sa90\cf2\b\fs28 4. Results\b0\cf1\par \pard\sb140\sa50\b\fs24 4.1 Deterministic half -- PASS\b0\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa60\fs23 \bullet\tab {\cf3\b Stage B determinism: PASS} for all three classes (1000 runs each -> byte-identical vector).\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa60\fs23 \bullet\tab {\cf3\b Class divergence works}: one classification -> Diplomat win, Scholar win (collapsed threshold), Assassin advance (not a persuader).\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa60\fs23 \bullet\tab {\cf3\b Decisive-move mechanic works}: discover -> reveal the scandal facet -> leverage -> threshold collapses -> win.\par \pard\sa120\fs23 This confirms the design intent: classify-don't-score successfully quarantines all run-to-run variance into Stage A, which is exactly where the harness then caught it.\par \pard\sb140\sa50\b\fs24 4.2 The real bet (Stage A stability) -- the kill-criterion\b0\par \pard\sa120\fs23 {\b Stage A axis classification is NOT stable run-to-run.} Probing each phrasing five times, four of five produced two or three different (axis / channel / ordinal) classifications. The same sentence was labelled with different scalar axes on different runs.\par \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx4200 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx8160 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 \b Player phrasing (the decisive move, varied)\b0\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 \b Distinct classifications in 5 runs\b0\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 \b Scandal facet\b0\cell \row \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx4200 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx8160 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 "I remind him, quietly, that I know about the bribes"\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 3 -- social/intimidation, insight/deception, insight/intimidation\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 true x5\cell \row \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx4200 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx8160 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 "I let slip that the scandal could become public"\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 3 -- social, force, and stealth (all intimidation)\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 true x5\cell \row \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx4200 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx8160 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 "If he convicts me, everyone hears how he was paid off"\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 1 -- social/intimidation/major\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 true x5\cell \row \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx4200 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx8160 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 "I hint his corruption need not come to light"\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 2 -- deception, intimidation\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 true x5\cell \row \trowd\trgaph108\trleft0 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx4200 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx8160 \clbrdrt\brdrs\clbrdrl\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrs\cellx9360 \pard\intbl\fs19 "I calmly mention the gold that changed hands"\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 3 -- insight/none, social/persuasion, insight/persuasion\cell \pard\intbl\fs19 true x5\cell \row \pard\par \pard\sa120\fs23 {\b But the leverage facet was detected with perfect stability:} {\f1\fs20 invokesScandalFacet = true} in all 25 classifications. The model is dependable about what leverage is invoked; it is unreliable about which scalar axis the action is.\par \pard\sa120\fs23 {\b The apparent 100% stable outcome was misleading.} The N=20 run reported 100% for the first phrasings -- but only because every divergent classification happens to map to {\cf4\b advance} (a loss of the decisive move) for the Diplomat: scandal leverage reads as intimidation/deception, where the Diplomat is weak, so nothing clears a win threshold. Where a winning classification was even possible ("I calmly mention the gold...": persuasion 1/5 -> win, otherwise advance), the outcome flips -- roughly 80%, i.e. {\cf4\b unstable}. So the decisive move both (a) rarely lands and (b) when it can, depends on a coin-flip axis label.\par \pard\sb140\sa50\b\fs24 4.3 Operational finding\b0\par \pard\sa120\fs23 Under repeated calls the run aborted with {\f1\fs20 API 400: Grammar compilation timed out} -- strict tool-use grammar compilation intermittently times out. A production translator needs retry/backoff or a non-strict + repair path (relevant to ADR-0007).\par \pard\sb220\sa90\cf2\b\fs28 5. Best / worst / surprise\b0\cf1\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa60\fs23 \bullet\tab {\b Best:} facet recognition was rock-solid (25/25). The model is dependable at naming the leverage -- the part the decisive move actually needs.\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa60\fs23 \bullet\tab {\b Worst:} single-axis classification of social intent is genuinely noisy -- the exact variance the concept feared.\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa60\fs23 \bullet\tab {\b Surprise:} the scene masked the instability. Stability-by-degenerate-collapse (everything fails the same way) looked like a pass until the probe exposed the variance.\par \pard\sb220\sa90\cf2\b\fs28 6. Verdict and the fix\b0\cf1\par \pard\sa120\fs23 The core idea survives, but the first mechanisation does not meet the kill-criterion as written. The fix is specific and cheap:\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa60\fs23 1.\tab {\b Key the decisive-move collapse on the reliably-detected facet} ({\f1\fs20 invokesScandalFacet}), not on a brittle single primary axis or magnitude.\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa60\fs23 2.\tab {\b Let Stage A name multiple axes} with per-axis ordinals (as ADR-0004 already envisions). A single primary axis discards nuance and lets incidental label variance flip outcomes.\par \pard\fi-360\li720\sa120\fs23 3.\tab {\b Handle the strict-tool grammar 400} with retry/backoff or a non-strict + JSON-repair path.\par \pard\sa120\fs23 Re-run the same harness after changes (1)+(2) before re-deciding. No content, tooling, or Compiler spend until the decisive-move outcome is stable.\par \pard\sb220\sa90\cf2\b\fs28 7. What this cost\b0\cf1\par \pard\sa120\fs23 ~30 live Haiku classifications -- a fraction of a cent. The prototype paid for itself by catching, in one afternoon, a stability-and-mapping flaw that would otherwise have surfaced after content authoring began.\par \pard\sa120\fs23 {\cf5\fs19\i Throwaway prototype -- not production code. The production translator is written fresh from the accepted ADRs; prototype code is never refactored into the engine.\i0}\par }